---
{"publish":true,"permalink":"/CHARACTERS/Esela old lore.md","created":"2025-11-05T16:40:43.267-05:00","modified":"2025-11-05T17:34:04.590-05:00","published":"2025-11-05T17:34:04.590-05:00","cssclasses":"","Actual Age":"1301 years"}
---

# old lore

Esela grew up with her grandmother, [Reika](Reika%20c3f81d2257d84c019e43faa2f13a035c.md), in [Kohoii](Kohoii%205ec34e8227ec4373998d026fd09ee730.md). Reika is the elder/leader of her clan in Kohoii, and Esela was next in line to be leader as well - as her mother [Naediia](Naediia%20dc678366936e41f384da240a61708663.md) unfortunately passed away in a conflict with the clan of [Solei](Solei%20a43736a3946f491ab5b40ad8e7fab381.md) when Esela was very young. Esela grew up very close to her grandmother, but had a sort of dissonance with her as well. Her grandmother is very traditional and judgmental - even going so far as to isolate their clan to protect them from further conflict after the loss of her daughter. Esela was very against this from the beginning. This disagreement was made even more prominent when Esela met [Kulith](Kulith%206b51a534f7f148af8253f5706f402a1b.md) - who came from the clan of Solei. Reika would not be approving of Kulith whatsoever. Kulith, being from Solei, was seen as an enemy, as a threat to Esela. Esela knew that her grandmother would not be supportive of their relationship, and attempted to hide it from her. Esela would often spend her time in her [Maeniil](Maeniil%202639c0bb7d004eca8bde4f17ca7a6cc2.md), or "Sanctuary", an opening in the woods outside of Kohoii where she could relax and have her time alone. Esela's grandmother knew of this spot, but respected Esela's privacy and never went there. This spot was where Esela would meet up with Kulith, away from the judgmental eyes of her grandmother.

However, this did not last forever - one day, as Esela and Kulith were spending time with each other in the Maeniil, they were suddenly interrupted by Reika's construct, rushing in to inform Esela that her grandmother had fallen and been injured. The construct is very loyal to Reika - so seeing Esela with a foreigner, hiding away from Reika... the construct made sure to let Reika know of this. Esela let Kulith know not to follow her, and Esela rushed to her grandmother's side. By the time Esela was able to get to Reika, the construct had already told her all about what she saw with Esela and Kulith. As one could imagine, Reika was not very happy about this. She interrogated Esela once she showed up - and Esela, being better at hiding than outright lying, was not able to keep her secret for long. Reika subsequently banned Esela from going to the Maeniil to see Kulith.

Esela, however, did not listen to this ban, and in the middle of the night while Reika was asleep, went out to the Maeniil to look for Kulith. Esela knew that they were from Solei, but Kulith was more of a wanderer. they did not go back to Solei often, but that means that Esela didn't know when or if Kulith would show up. Esela waited all night, until early in the morning, Kulith finally came back to the Maeniil. when Esela told Kulith what had happened with her grandmother and how they would not be able to see each other anymore, Kulith proposed that they leave together, to travel around Asilles together - and Esela accepted. They left that night.

The two of them traveled around the world together, meeting people and experiencing Asilles. After around 10 years of travelling, they decided to have their child, [Kaeyomii](Kaeyomii%205142f8eb7e52434bb492e122dceb3f62.md). When Kaeyomii was born, they decided to settle in a small village to take care of her. Kaeyomii was born with the specific magic ability to see the future. Growing up, this only showed her small things - what she will eat tomorrow, when someone will visit. However, when Kaeyomii turned 10, this took a different turn. She began seeing things in a much more distant future, even predicting The Crescentmoon Impact. She saw Esela, living on a moon, with what seemed to be a construct. At first, Esela and Kulith thought this must have been a mistake, or that she was exaggerating, but this vision was reoccurring. She began seeing more details as well - Esela creating a construct from the Crescentmoon debris, Esela using her teleportation magic to bring people up to the moons - until it finally happened.

It happened just as Kaeyomii had predicted, a meteorite crashed into Crescentmoon, sending much debris down to Asilles. The debris wiped out a majority of the population on the planet. In the chaos of the collision, a group of people from the village Esela, Kulith, and Kaeyomii were staying in, who knew Kaeyomii had future vision, believed the family had been hiding this information from everybody and essentially "allowed" this to happen. They went to their home in the middle of the night and lit it on fire, burning it to the ground. Fortunately, Esela and Kulith were able to make it out alive, but Kaeyomii was stuck inside and unable to be reached by Esela and Kulith before the house collapsed. Kaeyomii was lost that night, and Esela and Kulith were run out of the village they had called home for 10 years.

In her grief, Esela vowed to live out the predictions that her daughter saw before her death. She, along with Kulith, continued their travelling around Asilles - this time, speaking with survivors of the collision. She visited sites where debris had fallen, searching for the object Kaeyomii had spoken of that Esela would make the construct from. Eventually, she came across what she thought may be it - a golden headband with five stones laid across the top. Each of these stones held resemblance to one of Asilles' five moons, as the stones seemed to be tumbled pieces of rock from each of the moons. From this headband, she created [Merisdae](Merisdae%2096ee77d2a5d24d1aa718c98ca012d365.md), as a construct of moon.